chore: Release v1.3.0 (#7610)
ZcashFoundation/zebra: CHANGELOG.md

The format is based on [Keep a Changelog](https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0/),
and this project adheres to [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org).

> ## [Zebra 1.3.0](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/releases/tag/v1.3.0) - 2023-09-25

Reviewer: Consider updating the release date just before we merge.

> This release provides support for the Spend before Sync synchronization
> strategy, and contains the following updates:

Reviewer: Since this feature has gone by 3 different names, some users might not know what it's for:

```suggestion
This release adds RPC methods for the "Spend before Sync" light wallet synchronization
strategy, and fixes performance issues and bugs in the mining solution rate RPCs.
Progress bars can now be enabled using a config, please help us test them!

 It contains the following updates:
 
### User Testing: Progress Bars
 
Zebra now has progress bars! When progress bars are enabled, you can see Zebra's blocks,
transactions, and peer connections in your terminal. We're asking Zebra users to test this
feature, and give us [feedback on the forums](https://forum.zcashcommunity.com/t/zebra-progress-bars/44485).

To show progress bars while running Zebra, add these lines to your `zebrad.toml`:
```toml
[tracing]
progress_bar = "summary"
```

For more details, including a known issue with time estimates,
read our [progress bars blog post](https://zfnd.org/experimental-zebra-progress-bars/).
```

Reviewer: The suggestion didn't work with the toml block quote, so I applied this change in a commit.

Author: Thanks. I was trying to find out what the Spend before Sync "thing" is called. I used "synchronization strategy", but I also thought of "mechanism", "algorithm" or "solution". It looks like there's no official term for it.

Reviewer: "feature" 😂

Author: I'll go with that one!

> 

Reviewer: This changelog is current as of commit 0309afc0b97c9c159154c04afa7dd75a26091413 on September 26. Before we merge, let's check if there have been any more significant PRs.

Reviewer: This suggestion updates the changelog to commit cdddbcc7fe1d114fcfc8ce169bf93fdfd2ac4a67 on September 29: 
https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/pull/7610#discussion_r1340727295

### Security

- Fix database concurrency bugs that could have led to panics or incorrect history tree data (#7590)

### Added

- Add missing elasticsearch flag feature to lib docs (#7568)
- Add missing Docker variables and examples (#7552)

#### Spend before Sync support

- Add state requests and support code for the `z_getsubtreesbyindex` RPC (#7408)
- Implement the `z_getsubtreesbyindex` RPC (#7436)
- Add snapshot tests for the `z_getsubtreesbyindex` RPC (#7514)

> - Test the `z_getsubtreesbyindex` RPC (#7515, #7521, #7566)

Reviewer: Optional: these tests could be combined

Author: Done in [59f7bc1](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/pull/7610/commits/59f7bc1bdacbcd14998b250aa6f5da55fac06c81).

- Format subtree roots in little-endian order (#7466)
- Add note subtree indexes for new and existing blocks (#7437)
- Upgrade subtrees from the tip backwards, for compatibility with wallet syncing (#7531)
- Handle a subtree comparison edge case correctly (#7587)

### Changed

> - Check database format is valid every 5 minutes, to catch format errors in new block code (#7602)
> - Check database format is valid on shutdown, to catch format errors in new block code (#7606)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Check database format is valid every 5 minutes and on shutdown, to catch format errors in new block code (#7602, #7606)
```

Reviewer: We just reverted one of these changes in PR #7627, so I'd suggest instead:
```suggestion
- Check database format is valid on shutdown in production, to catch rare database edge-cases (#7606). We expect to catch almost all of these errors in CI (#7602, #7627).
```

The format is based on [Keep a Changelog](https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0/),
and this project adheres to [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org).

## [Zebra 1.3.0](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/releases/tag/v1.3.0) - 2023-09-25

This release provides support for the Spend before Sync synchronization
strategy, and contains the following updates:

### Security

> - Avoid panics and history tree consensus database concurrency bugs (#7590)

Reviewer: I think I wrote this one badly:

```suggestion
- Fix database concurrency bugs that could have led to panics or incorrect history tree data (#7590)
```

### Added

- Add missing elasticsearch flag feature to lib docs (#7568)

> - Add self hosted runner for long tests (#7520)

Reviewer: This change is not visible to users
```suggestion
```

- Add missing Docker variables and examples (#7552)

#### Spend before Sync support

- Add state requests and support code for the `z_getsubtreesbyindex` RPC (#7408)
- Implement the `z_getsubtreesbyindex` RPC (#7436)
- Add snapshot tests for the `z_getsubtreesbyindex` RPC (#7514)
- Add fixed test vectors for `z_getsubtreesbyindex` from zcashd to zebra ([#7515]

> - Test `z_getsubtreesbyindex` using a lightwalletd gRPC request (#7521)

Reviewer: These tests aren't visible to users, but we might want to mention that we tested the code. How about a single line that links to all 3 PRs?

There's also a missing bracket `)` at the end of one of these lines.

Author: Done in 4e9ee83e103c67d26d02bb990722b11f9ec66f1d.

> - Refactor docs for `z_getsubtreesbyindex` RPC state requests (#7462)

Reviewer: This change is not visible to users
```suggestion
```

- Use correct end heights for end of block subtrees during the full sync (#7566)
- Format subtree roots in little-endian order (#7466)
- Add note subtree indexes for new and existing blocks (#7437)
- Upgrade subtrees from the tip backwards, for compatibility with wallet syncing (#7531)

> - Add code comments to state validity test for subtree format upgrade (#7496)

Reviewer: Not visible to users

```suggestion
```

> - Format subtree roots in little-endian order (#7466)

Reviewer: Duplicate
```suggestion
```

> - Compare subtrees in non-finalized chains when evaluating chain equality (#7562)

Reviewer: Only used in test code, not visible to users
```suggestion
```

- Handle a subtree comparison edge case correctly (#7587)

> - Use correct end heights for end of block subtrees during the full sync (#7566)
> - Upgrade subtrees from the tip backwards, for compatibility with wallet syncing (#7531)
> - Add code comments to state validity test for subtree format upgrade (#7496)

Reviewer: Duplicates
```suggestion
```

### Changed

- Check database format is valid every 5 minutes, to catch format errors in new block code (#7602)
- Check database format is valid on shutdown, to catch format errors in new block code (#7606)

> - Restrict access to types for database writes (#7440)

Reviewer: Not visible to users
```suggestion
```

- Return errors instead of panicking in methods for Heights (#7591)

> - Update tests for new lightwalletd version used in Zebra ([#7349]

Reviewer: Technically this is actually the oldest `lightwalletd` fork 🙂 

```suggestion
- Update tests for compatibility with the ECC's `lightwalletd` fork (#7349)
```

and this project adheres to [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org).

## [Zebra 1.3.0](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/releases/tag/v1.3.0) - 2023-09-25

This release adds RPC methods for the "Spend before Sync" light wallet synchronization
strategy, and fixes performance issues and bugs in the mining solution rate RPCs.
Progress bars can now be enabled using a config, please help us test them!

It contains the following updates:
 
### User Testing: Progress Bars
 
Zebra has progress bars! When progress bars are enabled, you can see Zebra's blocks,
transactions, and peer connections in your terminal. We're asking Zebra users to test this
feature, and give us [feedback on the forums](https://forum.zcashcommunity.com/t/zebra-progress-bars/44485).

To show progress bars while running Zebra, add these lines to your `zebrad.toml`:
```toml
[tracing]
progress_bar = "summary"
```

For more details, including a known issue with time estimates,
read our [progress bars blog post](https://zfnd.org/experimental-zebra-progress-bars/).

### Security

- Fix database concurrency bugs that could have led to panics or incorrect history tree data (#7590)

> ### Added
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Added

- Zebra's progress bars can now be enabled using a `zebrad.toml` config (#7615)
```

This release adds RPC methods for the "Spend before Sync" light wallet feature,
and fixes performance issues and bugs in the mining solution rate RPCs. Progress
bars can now be enabled using a config, please help us test them!

It contains the following updates:
 
### User Testing: Progress Bars
 
Zebra has progress bars! When progress bars are enabled, you can see Zebra's blocks,
transactions, and peer connections in your terminal. We're asking Zebra users to test this
feature, and give us [feedback on the forums](https://forum.zcashcommunity.com/t/zebra-progress-bars/44485).

To show progress bars while running Zebra, add these lines to your `zebrad.toml`:
```toml
[tracing]
progress_bar = "summary"
```

For more details, including a known issue with time estimates,
read our [progress bars blog post](https://zfnd.org/experimental-zebra-progress-bars/).

### Security

- Fix database concurrency bugs that could have led to panics or incorrect history tree data (#7590, #7663)

### Added

- Zebra's progress bars can now be enabled using a `zebrad.toml` config (#7615)
- Add missing elasticsearch flag feature to lib docs (#7568)
- Add missing Docker variables and examples (#7552)

> 

Reviewer: Sorry about my previous confusing suggestion here!

```suggestion
- Check database format is valid on startup and shutdown (#7566, #7606). We expect to catch almost all database validity errors in CI (#7602, #7627), so users are unlikely to see them on startup or shutdown.

```

#### Spend before Sync Support

- Add state requests and support code for the `z_getsubtreesbyindex` RPC (#7408, #7734)
- Implement the `z_getsubtreesbyindex` RPC (#7436)
- Test the `z_getsubtreesbyindex` RPC (#7515, #7521, #7566, #7514, #7628)
- Format subtree roots in little-endian order (#7466)
- Add note subtree indexes for new and existing blocks (#7437)
- Upgrade subtrees from the tip backwards, for compatibility with wallet syncing (#7531)
- Handle a subtree comparison edge case correctly (#7587)

### Changed

- Return errors instead of panicking in methods for Heights (#7591)
- Update tests for compatibility with the ECC's `lightwalletd` fork (#7349)

> - Put chain data into an inner struct (#7608)

Reviewer: Optional Nitpick: users can't see this change.

Author: Done in [8c83495](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/pull/7610/commits/8c83495daae272013004fdba550fa739bbd4b191).

### Fixed

- Refactor docs for feature flags (#7567)
- Match zcashd's getblockchaininfo capitalisation for NU5 (#7454)

> - Populate subtree fields in the `NoteCommitmentTrees` struct (#7636)

Reviewer: Optional Nitpick: users can't see this change.

Author: Done in [8c83495](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/pull/7610/commits/8c83495daae272013004fdba550fa739bbd4b191).

> - Checking if transactions get into the mempool fails in lightwalletd tests (#7644)

Reviewer: Or this one.

Author: Done in [8c83495](https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra/pull/7610/commits/8c83495daae272013004fdba550fa739bbd4b191).
